add vercel-advanced-deployment-guide (PR from TinaCMS) (#4150)
tinacms/tina.io: content/docs/tinacloud/deployment-options/vercel.mdx

> ⚠️ **Simple option**: Keeps Vercel's auto-deploy, but conditionally ignores builds

> ⚠️ **Advanced option**: Completely disables Vercel's auto-deploy, full control via GitHub Actions

> ⚠️ **Important limitation of both options**: Due to the way Vercel is configured internally, every commit to a tracked branch will still count towards your quotas and concurrent build count

> ⚠️ **It is not recommended to use both options at the same time. It can lead to race conditions or undesirable behaviour. If you can handle the complexity, the advanced option is the recommended choice. It is a much more flexible and scalable solution for most custom use cases.**

### Simple option

Use Vercel's built-in functionality - follow the [Ignore Build Step Guide](https://vercel.com/docs/project-configuration/git-settings#ignored-build-step) to define a Bash or Node script to reject deploying certain builds conditionally.

Set your **`Ignore Build Step`** to **`Run my Bash script`** or **`Run my Node script`**.

> ![](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Vercel%20Bash.png)Figure: Ignored Build Step for running Bash scripts

Reviewer: Put the figure text as the alt text - I believe tina will show it as such

1. Stop Vercel from deploying automatically
2. Get the required information from Vercel to run our custom solution
3. Create a GitHub Actions Workflow to build the project and deploy it to Vercel
4. Tweak it so it debounces commits and deploys the latest changes 5 minutes after the last commit on the targeted branch

Those steps are just an example. Feel free to alter the workflow to suit your particular needs.

##### Stop automatic builds

In Vercel, navigate to your project **Settings | Git | Ignore Build Step** and set it to **`Don't build anything`**. This will disable the automatic deployments altogether. If that is not something you want, you might need to explore other options.

![](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Vercel%20Dont%20Build.png)Figure: Ignored Build Step for stopping all automatic deployments

##### Gather the required Vercel integration data

In Vercel, navigate to **My Account | Account Settings | Tokens**, create a token with a **`Scope`** of your projects and an appropriate expiration. Give it a descriptive name. **Copy the token when prompted to, you will need it for the next step, and you won't be able to see it again.**

> ****![](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Vercel%20Tokens.png)Figure: Token creation screen

Reviewer: Broken bold artifacts

##### Stop automatic builds

In Vercel, navigate to your project **Settings | Git | Ignore Build Step** and set it to **`Don't build anything`**. This will disable the automatic deployments altogether. If that is not something you want, you might need to explore other options.

![Ignored Build Step for stopping all automatic deployments](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Vercel%20Dont%20Build.png "Ignored Build Step for stopping all automatic deployments")

##### Gather the required Vercel integration data

In Vercel, navigate to **My Account | Account Settings | Tokens**, create a token with a **`Scope`** of your projects and an appropriate expiration. Give it a descriptive name. **Copy the token when prompted to, you will need it for the next step, and you won't be able to see it again.**

![Token creation screen](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Vercel%20Tokens.png "Token creation screen")

In Vercel, navigate to your project **Settings | General | Project ID** and copy the **`Project ID`** from there.

![Location of the Project ID to copy](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Vercel%20Project%20Id.png "Location of the Project ID to copy")

> In Vercel, navigate to your project and copy the site URL, e.g. [https://mycoolblog.vercel.app/](https://mycoolblog.vercel.app/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, navigate to your project and copy the site URL, e.g. [https://mycoolblog.vercel.app/](https://mycoolblog.vercel.app/).
```

Reviewer 2: Addressed in https://github.com/tinacms/tina.io/pull/4153

![Location of the project URL to copy](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Vercel%20Site%20URL.png "Location of the project URL to copy")

> In Vercel, navigate to **MyAccount | Account Settings | General | User ID** and copy **`User ID`** from there. That will be used as an organisation ID at a later step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, navigate to **MyAccount | Account Settings | General | User ID** and copy **`User ID`** from there. That will be used as an organisation ID at a later step.
```

![Location of the User ID to copy](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Vercel%20User%20Id.png "Location of the User ID to copy")

##### Set up repository secrets to use with a workflow

Navigate to your **GitHub Profile | Your Project | Settings | Security | Secrets and variables | Actions | Repository secrets**.

Create the following secrets with the respective data you obtained from Vercel:

<WarningCallout
  body={<>
    Variable names must match exactly for the Workflow to work.
  </>}
/>

* **VERCEL\_TOKEN**
* **VERCEL\_PROJECT\_ID**
* **VERCEL\_URL**
* **VERCEL\_ORG\_ID**

![GitHub Repo Secrets Creation Page](/img/docs/tina-cloud-deployment-options/Repo%20Secrets%20Creation.png "GitHub Repo Secrets Creation Page")

##### Set up the workflow in the project

At the root of your project, create the following folder structure:

```
.github/workflows/vercel-deploy-debounced.yml

> ```

Reviewer 2: I would prefer not to lock this step into any particular OS. Creating a file is trivial enough.

This is where the magic happens and this is where we will put our custom logic for the GitHub Actions.

> Now let's add some content to the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> The code below will create a GitHub Actions Workflow to deploy to Vercel when 5 minutes have passed since the last commit to **`main`**. Follow the comments to understand how we handle the debouncing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following code to the created workflow file `.github/workflows/vercel-deploy-debounced.yml`. It will create a GitHub Actions Workflow to deploy to Vercel when 5 minutes have passed since the last commit to **`main`**. Follow the comments to understand how we handle the debouncing.
```

Reviewer 2: Addressed in https://github.com/tinacms/tina.io/pull/4153

          # Therefore, if this step completes, it means there was a 5-minute
          # window without new commits on this branch.

      - name: Install Vercel CLI
        run: npm install --global vercel@latest

      - name: Pull Vercel Environment Information
        # This step pulls your Vercel project's environment variables and configuration.
        # This is often needed for the 'vercel build' step to succeed.
        run: vercel pull --yes --environment=production --token=${{ secrets.VERCEL_TOKEN }}

      - name: Build Project
        # This performs the build locally within the GitHub Actions runner.
        run: vercel build --prod --token=${{ secrets.VERCEL_TOKEN }}
        env:
          SITE_URL: ${{ secrets.VERCEL_URL }}

      - name: Deploy Project to Vercel
        # The '--prebuilt' flag tells Vercel to use the already built output from the previous step,
        # which saves Vercel build minutes as it doesn't need to build again.
        run: vercel deploy --prebuilt --prod --token=${{ secrets.VERCEL_TOKEN }}
        env:
          VERCEL_ORG_ID: ${{ secrets.VERCEL_ORG_ID }}
          VERCEL_PROJECT_ID: ${{ secrets.VERCEL_PROJECT_ID }}
```

> Push the file to your GitHub repo. The workflow will be created automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now push the file to your GitHub repo. GitHub will automatically create the workflow.
```

  # Proceed with the build
  echo "✅ - Build can proceed"
  exit 1;

else
  # Don't build
  echo "🛑 - Build cancelled"
  exit 0;
fi
```

### Advanced option

If your use case is more complicated, it is easier to delegate the build and deployment process to the GitHub Actions Workflows. They have a lot more customisation and allow you to tweak the process to do exactly what you want.

In a nutshell, what we are going to do is:

1. Stop Vercel from deploying automatically
2. Get the required information from Vercel to run our custom solution
3. Create a GitHub Actions Workflow to build the project and deploy it to Vercel
4. Tweak it so it debounces commits and deploys the latest changes 5 minutes after the last commit on the targeted branch

Those steps are just an example. Feel free to alter the workflow to suit your particular needs.

##### Stop automatic builds

In Vercel, navigate to your project **Settings > Git > Ignore Build Step** and set it to **`Don't build anything`**. This will disable the automatic deployments altogether. If that is not something you want, you might need to explore other options.

##### Gather the required Vercel integration data

> In Vercel, navigate to **My Account > Settings > Tokens**, create a token with a **`Scope`** of your projects and an appropriate expiration. Give it a descriptive name. **Copy the token when prompted to, you will need it for the next step, and you won't be able to see it again.**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Vercel, navigate to **My Account | Settings | Tokens**, create a token with a **`Scope`** of your projects and an appropriate expiration. Give it a descriptive name. **Copy the token when prompted to, you will need it for the next step, and you won't be able to see it again.**
```
